Wavefront installation and Configuration documentation (#264)
spring-io/dataflow.spring.io: content/documentation/pages/5-feature-guides/2-streams/12-monitoring.md

description: 'Monitoring streaming data pipelines with Prometheus and InfluxDB'
---

# Stream Monitoring with Prometheus, Wavefront and InfluxDB

This section describes how to monitor the applications that were deployed as part of a Stream. The setup for each platform is different, but the general architecture is the same across all the platforms.

The Data Flow metrics architecture is designed around the [Micrometer](https://micrometer.io/) library, which is a vendor-neutral application metrics facade. It provides a simple facade over the instrumentation clients for the most popular monitoring systems. See the [Micrometer documentation](https://micrometer.io/docs) for the list of supported monitoring systems. Micrometer is the instrumentation library that powers the delivery of application metrics from Spring Boot. Spring Integration provides [additional integration](https://docs.spring.io/spring-integration/docs/current/reference/html/system-management.html#micrometer-integration) to expose metrics around message rates and errors, which is critical to the monitoring of deployed streams.

> All the Spring Cloud [Stream Applications](https://docs.spring.io/spring-cloud-dataflow/docs/current/reference/htmlsingle/#applications) are configured to support two of the most popular monitoring systems, [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/), [Wavefront](https://www.wavefront.com/) and [InfluxDB](https://www.influxdata.com/). You can declaratively select which monitoring system the deployed applications will use.

Reviewer: The next release 3.0 M1 would include Wavefront, right? Why discounting it from here then?

> [Wavefront](https://docs.wavefront.com/wavefront_introduction.html) is a high-performance streaming analytics platform that supports 3D observability (metrics, histograms, traces/spans). It scales to very high data ingestion rates and query loads, while collecting data many services and sources across your entire application stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Wavefront](https://docs.wavefront.com/wavefront_introduction.html) is a high-performance streaming analytics platform that supports 3D observability (metrics, histograms, traces/spans). It scales to very high data ingestion rates and query loads while also collecting data many services and sources across your entire application stack.
```

[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) is a popular pull-based Time Series Database that pulls the metrics from the target applications with pre-configured endpoints and provides a query language to select and aggregate time series data in real time.

[InfluxDB](https://www.influxdata.com/) is a popular open-source push-based Time Series Database. It supports downsampling, automatically expiring and deleting unwanted data, and backup and restore. Analysis of data is done through an SQL-like query language.

To enable support for different monitoring systems, you can [customize the Stream Applications](https://docs.spring.io/spring-cloud-stream-app-starters/docs/current/reference/htmlsingle/#_patching_pre_built_applications) to use a different monitoring system.

> To help you get started monitoring streams, Data Flow provides [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) dashboards (for Prometheus and InfluxDB) that you can install and customize for your needs. For Wavefront you can use the Data Flow Integration Tail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To help you get started monitoring streams, Data Flow provides [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) dashboards (for Prometheus and InfluxDB) that you can install and customize for your needs. For Wavefront, you can use the Data Flow Integration tile for a rich and comprehensive metrics visualization.
```

![Runtime Applications Monitoring](images/grafana-scdf-ui-buttons-streams.png)

> Installing Wavefront, Prometheus and InfluxDB is different depending on the platform on which you run. Links to installation instructions are provides in each section below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Choosing between Wavefront, Prometheus, or InfluxDB and installing necessary components is different depending on the platform on which you run. Links to installation instructions are provided in each section below.
```

## Local

> This section describes how to view application metrics for streams using Prometheus or InfluxDB as the metrics store on your local machine. Wavefront is a cloud offering, but you still can deploy Data Flow locally can point it to your remote Wavefront monitoring system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes how to view application metrics for streams using Prometheus or InfluxDB as the metrics store on your local machine. Wavefront is a cloud offering, but you still can deploy Data Flow locally can point it to a cloud-managed Wavefront monitoring system.
```

![SCDF Grafana Prometheus](images/grafana-prometheus-scdf-applications-dashboard.png)

<!--Wavefront -->

### Wavefront

> To install Data Flow with Wavefront support, follow the [Monitoring with Wavefront](%currentPath%/installation/local/docker-customize/#wavefront) Docker Compose instructions. This will bring up Spring Cloud Data Flow, Skipper, Apache Kafka, and point it to the Wavefront Data Flow Integration tile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install Data Flow with Wavefront support, follow the [Monitoring with Wavefront](%currentPath%/installation/local/docker-customize/#wavefront) Docker Compose instructions. This will bring up Spring Cloud Data Flow, Skipper, Apache Kafka, and it will also point to the Wavefront's Data Flow Integration Tile automatically.
```

> The Wavefront is a SaaS offering and you need to create user account first and use it to set the `WAVEFRONT_KEY` and `WAVEFRONT_URI` environment variables as explained below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Wavefront is a SaaS offering and you need to create a user account first. With that account, you will be able to set the `WAVEFRONT_KEY` and `WAVEFRONT_URI` environment variables as explained below.
```

![SCDF Grafana Prometheus](images/grafana-prometheus-scdf-applications-dashboard.png)

<!--Wavefront -->

### Wavefront

> The Wavefront is a SaaS offering and you need to create user account first and obtain the `API-KEY` and `WAVEFRONT-URI` assigned to your account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Wavefront is a SaaS offering. You need to create a user account first and obtain the `API-KEY` and `WAVEFRONT-URI` assigned to your account.
```

Follow the general [Data Flow Kubernetes installation instructions](<(%currentPath%/installation/kubernetes/)>).

Then add the following properties to your Spring Cloud Data Flow server configuration (e.g. `src/kubernetes/server/server-config.yaml`) for enabling the Wavefront Integration:

```yml
management:
  metrics:
    export:
      wavefront:
        enabled: true
        api-token: <YOUR API-KEY>
        uri: <YOUR WAVEFRONT-URI>
        source: demo-scdf-source
spring:
  cloud:
    dataflow:
      applicationProperties:
        stream:
          management:
            metrics:
              export:
                wavefront:
                  enabled: true
                  api-token: <YOUR API-KEY>
                  uri: <YOUR WAVEFRONT-URI>
                  source: demo-scdf-source
```

> Then on the Wavefront portal you should see dashboards similar to those shown in the following image:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then on the Wavefront portal, you should see dashboards similar to those shown in the following image:
```

After deploying a stream, you can launch to view the Grafana dashboard as shown in the following image:

![SCDF Grafana Prometheus](images/grafana-prometheus-scdf-applications-dashboard.png)

<!--Wavefront -->

### Wavefront

> The Wavefront is a SaaS offering and you need to create user account first and obtain the `API-KEY` and `WAVEFRONT-URI` assigned to your account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Wavefront is a SaaS offering. You need to create a user account first and obtain the `API-KEY` and `WAVEFRONT-URI` assigned to your account.
```

> To configure the Data Flow server's manifest to send metrics data from stream applications to the Wavefront monitoring system, follow the [Manifest based Wavefront configuration instructions](%currentPath%/installation/cloudfoundry/cf-cli/#configuration-for-wavefront).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure the Data Flow Server to send metrics data from stream applications to the Wavefront monitoring system, follow the [Manifest based Wavefront configuration instructions](%currentPath%/installation/cloudfoundry/cf-cli/#configuration-for-wavefront).
```
